
			   Even and Even if
			  ------------------

1. Introduction

'Even-if' conditionals are problematic in giving a semantics of
conditionals. Consider the following 'even-if' conditionals where in
(1a) the consequent is asserted regardless of the truth of the
antecedent, while this is not true in (1b).

(1) a. Even if the bridge were standing, I would not cross.
    b. Even if he drank just a little, she would fire him. 

Rather than treating 'even-if' as an idiomatic chunk we expect an
analysis of 'even-if' conditionals should fall out of a general theory
of the semantics of 'even' giving us a semantics for 'even-if' which
is compositional. And so we first want to account for the distribution
of 'even' in non-conditionals:

(2) Even Grannie was sober.

The intuition about the use of 'even' in (2) is that Grannie was
sober, someone else was sober too and it's more surprising that
Grannie was sober than any of the other people being sober. There are
several ways we can account for this intuition: (a) The minimal view,
'even' has no semantic contribution, only emphasis. Which means (1)
can be paraphrased as `Gosh, GRANNIE was sober.' (b) Conversational
implicature, 'even' has no semantic contribution but triggers an
implicature which is nondetachable. (c) Semantic view, 'even' has a
purely truth conditional meaning. (d) Speech acts, 'even' is
felicitous only when a certain speech act is performed. (a) is
difficult to maintain. We'll be looking at (b), (c) and (d).

2. 'Even' and conversational implicature

First we look at 'even' as a lexical item that doesn't affect the
truth conditions but which triggers a conversational implicature. 

Bennett(82) notices that 'even' can operate over almost every part of
the sentence cf. (3). Define the scope of 'even' to be that part of
the sentence on which 'even' acts as an operator.

(3) a. Even Max tried on the trousers.
    b. Max even tried on the trousers.
    c. Max tried on even the trousers.
    d. Max tried on the trousers, even.
    e. Even HER children laughed at him.
    f. Even her CHILDREN laughed at him.

Bennett(82) gives the following conditions on the felicity of 'even':
Take an 'even' sentence S, remove 'even' to get S* and then form
neighbours of S called { S0, S1, ... } by replacing the scope of
'even' in S with a contextually relevant set of alternatives (although
Bennett(82) calls this "something else that yields a sentence"). And
so applying these rules on (4a) we get:

(4) a. (S)  Even the children laughed at him.
    b. (S*) The children laughed at him.
    c. (S0) Everybody laughed at him.
    d. (S1) Nobody laughed at him.
    e. (S2) His grandmother laughed at him.

Now Bennett(82) defines the following conditions on felicity of
'even'.

(5) a. Sj is true, where Sj is a neighbour of S, Sj is mutually
	believed by speaker and hearer and is salient in the
	discourse. 
    b. the truth of S* and Sj is part of a single more general
	truth. This condition takes care of the situation where `his
	grandmother laughed at him' for an independent and incidental
	reason from `the children laughed at him'
    c. it is more surprising that S* is true than that Sj is true.

(5) simply states the condition that in the contextually relevant set
the scope of `even' is the least likely element to which the assertion
in S is applied. An important assumption that Bennett(82) makes is
that among the alternatives that are used to create each Sj is the
null or empty string. This is used in his analysis of the even-if
conditional where the consequent is asserted. Lycan(91) complains
loudly about this and we'll come back to this when we take up his
analysis.

Bennett(82) can now analyze the difference between (1a) and (1b)
(i.e. whether the consequent is entailed or not in an even-if
conditional) to be a difference of the scope of even in the two
sentences. 

The informal notion of scope of even can be interpreted to be the
focus of the sentence which gives a set of alternatives over which the
conventional implicature of `even' applies. This is the tack followed in
von Fintel(94).

2.1 Introduced-if conditionals

Recall that (1a) reproduced below entails its consequent.

(1) a. Even if the bridge were standing, I would not cross.

Take the scope of `even' to be `if the bridge were standing' and then
given the null string assumption we have the following:

(6) a. (Sj) I will not cross.
    b. (S*) If the bridge were standing, I would not cross.

And so 'even' is felicitous as (i) Sj is true, mutually believed and
salient, (ii) Sj is unified with S* as a wide range of conditions is
inimical to the crossing of the bridge, and so what Bennett is
actually saying here is that Sj is equivalent to `Under any condition
I will not cross.' and (iii) Sj is less surprising than S*.

Hence (6a) is true by (i). (ii) and (iii) are problematic and these
problems are considered by Lycan(91) and we return to this later.

2.2 Standing-if conditionals

In (1b), reproduced below, the even-if conditional does not entail its
consequent.

(1) b. [ His boss is puritanical and so if he drank a lot she would
	fire him ]. Even if he drank just a little, she would fire
	him. 

Here the scope of `even' is `just a little' (Cf. `If he drank even
just a little...'). Then we have:

(7) a. (Sj) If he drank a lot she would fire him.
    b. (S*) If he drank just a little she would fire him.

Here as before (i) Sj is known to be true, (ii) truth of Sj is
naturally linked to the truth of S* and (iii) S* is more surprising
than Sj. Note that in (1b) we also get the reading in which whatever
he did, even if he drank just a little, she would still fire him which
is a introduced-if conditional simply derived by a different scope of
`even'.

Notice that the analysis of both types of `even-if' conditionals is
purely compositional. Lest you forget, Bennett reminds you of this
fact on every other page.

2.3 Counterexamples

(i) Even with Comparatives

The analysis in Bennett(82) doesn't cover the following case:

(8) My wife's satisfaction is even greater than my own.

Bennett(82) and consequently Lycan(91) both ascribe this use of 'even'
as a lexical meaning of 'even' distinct from the cases discussed
above. 

(ii) Barker's Counterexample

(9)  a. A: Looking outside the yard expecting only to find family members
	   I see 3 figures and remark, {There's Pa and Grandma outside
	   and even Ronald Reagan!} 
        B: Even Reagan is outside!
     b. (Sj) Pa is outside.
     c. (S*) Reagan is outside.

Barker(91) shows that although (9a) is infelicitous, Bennett's three
conditions are satisfied. (i) Sj is mutually believed (ii) Sj and S*
are parts of a single more general truth and (iii) S* is more
surprising than Sj.

Bennett(82) also expends a great deal of ink trying to argue that an
even-if P,Q conditional is logically equivalent to an if P,Q
conditional because (he argues) `even' contributes no truth
conditional import to the conditional. So this means that every
model that makes true an even-if conditional also makes true the
if-conditional obtained by deleting `even'. But this doesn't work as
in (9') if we have a model in which `John bakes the cake' then in (9'a)
we have `I do not eat the cake' whereas in (9'b) we have `I eat the
cake'. 

(9') a. If John doesn't bake the cake, I will eat it.
     b. Even if John doesn't bake the cake, I will eat it.

The reason for arguing for such a logical equivalence is to show that
the consequent in both `Even if that finger were bent, Syracuse would
be in New York' and in `If that finger were bent, Syracuse would be in
New York' is always asserted. Barker has something to say about this
and we come back to this while considering his analysis.

3. `Even' as a Universal Quantifier

Lycan(91) asks two questions of the approach taken in Bennett(82):

(i) How can (6a) and (6b) reproduced below be parts of a single and
more general truth as Bennett's conditions require.

(6) a. (Sj) I will not cross.
    b. (S*) If the bridge were standing, I would not cross.

and,

(ii) In the case of `Even Grannie laughed at him' there is a reference
set { x : x laughed at him } which defines the neighbours (Sj) of the
sentence (S). But there is no such set immediately obvious in
(6). Even if(!) you change (6a) to the sentences in (10) it doesn't
rescue the discrepancy that both (10a) and (10b) are less likely than
(6a) and hence `even' should be infelicitous as per Bennett's theory.

(10) a. If the bridge were in any condition, I would not cross.
     b. I would not cross under any condition.

As Lycan notes this problem is directly linked to the null string
assumption we pointed out earlier.

Lycan(91) then embarks on a modified theory of `even-if' which
contends that `even' in `even-if' means simply `even' just as `only'
in `only-if' means `only'. This is claimed internal to his theory of
conditionals. The paper after this is formalized is a successive
watering down of this strong version in the face of the various uses
of `even-if'.

3.1 Lycan's Theory of Conditionals

The basic idea is that like `when' and `where', `if' is an operator
that forms an adverbial clause containing a universal quantifier.

(11) a. I'll leave when you leave.
     b. ForAll t [ relevant time t ] [ you leave at t -> 
		I'll leave at t ]

(12) a. I'll leave if you leave.
     b. ForAll e [ relevant events/conditions e ] [ you leave in e -> 
		I'll leave in e ]

The restrictor of the quantifier varies with the context. There are
two requirements on the restrictor in (12):

(i) It must contain at least one event for which the conditional
antecedent is true.
(ii) All actual relevant events are in the restrictor set. Else, modus
ponens fails.

3.2 Even-if

`Even-if' conditionals are analyzed as in (13), where (13a) is
transformed into (13d) through a series of equivalences.

(13) a. I'll leave even if you leave.
     b.                      the event that
        I'll leave even in { events in which        } you leave.
                             circumstances in which
     c. I'll leave in any event including the events in which you
	leave. 
     d. ForAll e, ForAll f [ e,f in R ] [ In(e, I'll leave) /\
		( In(f, You leave) -> In(f, I'll leave) ) ]

Note that in the theory of `even-if' presented so far, the consequent
will always be entailed. Thus Q even if P is felt to assert Q because
(on the "event" analysis) its first conjunct says in effect that in
any envisioned event, Q is true.

This brings us back full circle to the Consequent-Entailement problem
in the sentence (1b) reproduced below as (14a) for which we get the
analysis due to Lycan in (14b)

(14) a. Even if he drank a little, she would fire him.
     b. ForAll e, Forall f [ e,f in R ] [ In(e, She fires him) /\
		( In(f, He drinks a little) -> In(f, She fires him) ) ]

To handle this, Lycan weakens his earlier notion of even=even-if and
asks the question: what does `even' add semantically to the derivation
in (14b)?  Seemingly, it adds:

(i) implicit reference to a contextually specified WIDER class.
(ii) univeral quantification over this class.

Also, the focus of even as defined by Bennett(82) also is crucial in
the definition of the restrictor set. In (14a) then Lycan admits to
`even' taking `just a little' as its scope and hence modifying the
restrictor set to be every amount that he can drink including just a
little. And so (14b) now becomes (15) where she would fire him iff
every amount including just a little is such that if he drank that
amount, she would fire him.

(15) ForAll e, Forall f [ e,f in R ] [ In(e, She fires him) /\
		( In(f, He drinks) -> In(f, She fires him) ) ]

Lycan(91) then claims that there is independent reason to believe that
`even' should be a universal quantifier. `Even' is closely akin to
`only'. Both can occur in almost any grammatical position. Since
`only' and `even' occur in the same syntactic enivironments and only
is uncontroversially an universal quantifier, `even' must be one too. 


3.3 Counterexamples

(i) `even' as an intensifier of comparatives. This was noted by
Bennett (in (8)) and proposed to be a different lexical use of
`even'. Lycan having no analysis to offer, agrees.

(ii) In example (16)

(16) You have to be 11 or 12 or even 13 to get your ears pierced.

This intuitively means that when parents are strict they make children
wait till they're 13. So if we simply analyze this as univeral
quantification then we get 'Every age at which any of the relevant
children is to be allowed by their parents to get their ears pierced,
including ageees 13 is F' where F can be construed as `at least 11 and
is required by some parent', 13 being less expected to be required
than 11 or 12. "This is awkward at best." And since we have (17) below
Lycan takes this case of `even' also as a comparative intensifier.

(17) *You have to be even 13 to get your ears pierced.

(iii) In example (18)

(18) a. I'll be polite even if you insult me, but I won't be polite if
	you insult my wife.
     b. ForAll e, Forall f [ e,f in R ] [ In(e, I'm polite) /\
		( In(f, you insult me) -> In(f, I'm polite) ) ]
	   Forall g [ g in R ] [ In(g, you insult my wife) ->
		In(g, ~(i'm polite)) ]

(18b) entails that there is no event e in R in which you insult my
wife which contradicts the condition on the restrictor (for the third
conjunct) which says that such an event (of `insulting my wife') must
exist. Also, (18a) does not assert `I'll be polite no matter what'. To
handle this case, Lycan adds the ability to change the restrictor set
for the third conjunct where an additional possible event is
"envisioned" of `you insulting my wife'. This contradicts the
assumption made earlier that all envisioned events were in R. Lycan
shrugs it off by saying that there is independent evidence for saying
that modus ponens shouldn't exist.

(iv) If `even' is universal quantification then it shouldn't permit
exceptions.

(19) [ Gonzo and Bluto are virtually certain to go to this party. But
	everyone else falls ill and none of the others turn up. Both
	Gonzo and Bluto are also ill. Bluto doesn't manage to go but
	Bluto does and on reaching the party says to the host ...] 
     Even Gonzo stayed at home.

Here lies the rub: Lycan's theory predicts that `Everyone stayed at
home including Bluto.' This counterexample drives Lycan to weakening
his theory further. Lycan converts the original quantification which
meant "every ... including ..." to "every ... PLUS ...". This means
that `Even Grannie was sober' now means everyone whom you would expect
to be sober was sober PLUS Grannie was sober too. This leaves open the
possibility that someone besides Grannie was unexpectedly sober too. 

This handles (19) but now Q even if P does not entail Q as the
restrictor contains possibilities that are also "expected" and not
just relevant. Notably, Q is not entailed even in cases earlier
considered to be cases of consequent entailment. Lycan argues that
this is not as bad as it seems because in any conditional there is a
possible reading in which the consequent is not entailed. This last
weakening of the theory also takes `even' away from `only' as `only'
still quantifies over the entire universe of contextually specified
items while `even' is now restricted to a proper subset of this group
containing just the expected members.

4. Scalar Analyses

You could consider `even' as having inducing a scalar implicature over
some scale (as defined in Fauconnier) where the scope of even is the
most unlikely element in the scale for this assertion to made of it
and the scalar implicature gives universal quantification over the
scale. Both Lycan(91) and Barker(91) quote (19) as a direct
contradiction to such an approach as both Gonzo and Bluto are equally
unlikely to not attend the party the scalar analyses fail. A better
example from Barker(91) is:

(20) [ There are 3 philosophy students at a rally where police go out
	of their way to arrest philosophy students ]
     A: Who got arrested today?
     B: Just some philosophy students: Fred, Mary, and even Jane.

Here although Jane is the least unlikely person to get arrested, a
scalar implicature universally quantifies hence predicting (20) to be
felicitous, but according to Barker(91) (20) is infelicitous.

5. Even as a Speech Act Modifier

Consider (20). A more general form of B's utterance can be written as:

(21) Just some/only some/few/x's were F: (these being) a, b and even
	c. 

Barker claims that in (21) the `even' implies that we are performing
some speech act with c (Jane in (20)) while the rest of the sentence
implies or presupposes that we are performing some other speech act
with c. Hence (20) is bad. In enumerating people who were arrested
(20) exhibits an "existential instantiation" speech-act. Barker then
calls the speech-act associated with `even' the "universal
instantiation" speech-act which states that the statement S is an
instance of an implied or asserted universal quantification along the
current `pragmatic scale'. Let this universal quantification give rise
to a statement called Su.

Barker then gives his conditions for felicity of an even-statement
assuming the conventions specified in Bennett(82).

(i) S* and Sj are asserted as universal instantiation cases of an
implied or stated Su.
(ii) S* is an extreme case of Su.

And `even' is a modifier of the speech act "universal
instantiation". This mechanism handles many of the counterexamples
mentioned so far. (16) was one such case:

(16) You have to be 11 or 12 or even 13 to get your ears pierced.

In this case it is not asserted that the age should be 11 or 12,
rather these function as age estimates. This means that (16) can be
paraphrased as (22a):

(22) a. The ages 11, 12, even 13 accords with my impression of an age at
	which you can get your ears pierced.
     b. (Sj) The age of 11 accords with my impression.
     c. (S)  Even the age 13 accords with my impression.
     d. (S*) The age 13 accords with my impression. 
     e. (Su) Any height between 11 and 13 accords with my impression.

Then given the value for Sj, S and S* (as 11, 12 even 13 is implicitly
a conjunct) it is easy to see that S* and Sj fall under Su and S* is
an extreme case of Su.

The other counterexample to both Bennett and Lycan was even in
comparatives like in (23a):

(23) a. Their house is even larger than ours.
     b. (Su) Most/All houses are such that their house is larger than
	them. 
     c. (S*) Their house is larger than ours.
     d. (Sj) Their house is larger than a doghouse.

S* and Sj are derived straightforwardly. Su is derived from the fact
that `their house' is the scope of `even' and hence (23a) is about how
large their house is. Then, S* is surprising only if our house is also
larger than most houses and so S* can be considered an extreme case of
Su. 

5.1 Introduced-if conditionals

Barker runs into problems (as Lycan did) with the null string
assumption that allowed Bennett to define even-if conditionals with
the consequent entailed or asserted. For Barker, there can be no Su
with Q and if P, Q as instantiation cases.

Barker defines consequent-entailment in terms of the connection
between P and Q in a even-if P, Q conditional. Q can be asserted no
matter what if P and Q are not connected in any way. P is connected to
Q if the context defines a causal or analytic reason for Q to be
true. Barker uses the `I will not cross' example of an introduced-if
conditional to show that a connection always holds for this class thus
reducing it to standing-if conditionals. The argument lies in the
inference from (24a) to (24c).

(24) a. Even if the bridge is standing I will not cross.
     b. I won't use any of the available means of crossing.
     c. I won't cross the river.

So Barker effectively claims that Bennett's class of introduced-if
conditionals does not exist as a class.

5.2 Still

Now Barker's tack is if introduced-if conditionals do not assert their
consequent no matter what, is there a category of even-if conditionals
that always assert their consequent. Barker claims that even-if
conditionals of the form Even if P Still Q is such a category.

(25) a. Even if Bill pays me $200, I'm still not going to do
	it. 
     b. If my finger were bent, Syracuse would still be in New York. 

Barker then shows that the assertion of Q in an Even-if P, Q
conditional holds only when still appears in the consequent. This is
explained by Barker by saying that (Still P) is true just in case the
state of affairs P, or some component of it has persisted against some
condition. This explains the "bent-finger" problem which was not
satisfactorily explained in Bennett(82). (25b) would be interpreted as
(26) because Syracuse remaining in New York has persisted inspite the
antecedent of the conditional.

(26) If my finger were bent, then the fact of my finger's being bent
	would not undermine the fact that Syracuse is in New York.

However, von Fintel(94) gives cases of introduced-if conditionals
where an interpretation can be forced such that the consequent is
entailed, typically in cases where the antecedent is exhaustive:

(27) a. If John is dead or alive, I will find him.
     b. If John were the last man on earth, I wouldn't marry him.

------
Anoop Sarkar, anoop@linc.cis, 3/23/95, Lx554



References:

Jonathan Bennett. {Even If}. Linguistics and Philosophy (5) 403-418,
1982. 

William Lycan. {Even and Even If}. Linguistics and Philosophy (14)
115-150, 1991. 

Stephen Barker. {Even, Still and Counterfactuals}. Linguistics and
Philosophy (14) 1-38, 1991.

Kai von Fintel. {Restrictions on Quantifier Domains}. PhD diss U
Mass. 1994.
